McClure's Magazine
Vol. XX No. 1

November, 1902

THE HISTORY OF THE STANDARD OIL COMPANY

BY IDA M. TARBELL
Author of "The Life of Lincoln"

Chapter I--The Birth of an Industry

ONE of the busiest corners of the globe at the opening of the year 1872 was a strip of Northwestern Pennsylvania, not over fifty miles long, known the world over as the Oil Regions. Twelve years before, this strip of land had been but little better than a wilderness its only inhabitants the lumbermen, who every season cut great swaths of primeval pine and hemlock from its hills, and in the spring floated them down the Allegheny River to Pittsburg.  The great tides of Western emigration had shunned the spot for years as too rugged and unfriendly for settlement, and yet in twelve years this region avoided by men had been transformed into a bustling trade center, where towns elbowed each other for place, into which the three great trunk railroads had built branches, and every foot of whose soil was fought for by capitalists. It was the discovery and development of a new raw product, petroleum, which had made this change from wilderness to market-place. This product in twelve years had not only peopled a waste place of the earth, it had revolutionized the world's methods of illumination and added millions upon millions of dollars to the wealth of the United States.

Petroleum as a curiosity was no new thing. For more than two hundred years it had been described in the journals of Western explorers. For decades it had been dipped up from the surface of springs, soaked up by blankets from running streams, found in quantities when salt wells were bored, bottled and sold as a cure-all--"Seneca Oil" or "Rock Oil," it was called. One man had even distilled it in a crude way, and sold it as an illuminant.  Scientists had described it, and travelers from the West often carried bottles to their scientific friends in the East. It was such a bottleful, brought as a gift to the professor of chemistry of Dartmouth college, in 1854, that at last found a man willing to take it seriously. This man was George H. Bissell, a graduate of Dartmouth, who, worn out by an experience of ten years in the South as a journalist and teacher, had come North for a change. At his old college the latest curiosity of the laboratory was shown him--the bottle of rock oil,--and the professor contended that it was as good as, or better than, coal for making illuminating oil. Hundreds of others had seen bottles of rock oil and heard its value speculated about, but Bissell was the first man to take means to find out what it was worth.

He began in a practical
way. He formed a company
-the Pennsylvania Rock
Oil Company-the first in
the UnitedStates,andleased
the land on which the principal
oil springs were known
to be. Then he sent a quantity
of the oil to Professor
Silliman of Yale College,
and paid him for analyzing
it. The professor's report
was published, and received
general attention. From the
rock oil might be made as
good an illuminant as any
the world knew. It also
yielded gas, paraffine, and
lubricating oil. "In short,"
Professor Silliman declared,
"your company have in
their possession a raw material
from which by simple,
and not expensive process
they may manufacture very
valuable products. It is
worthy of note that my experiments
prove that nearly
the wlwle of the raw product
may be manufactured
without waste, and this
solely by a well-directed
process which is in practice
in one of the most simple
of all chemical processes."

This was well; but so far
not enough of the oil had
been obtained to manufacture
anything in quantities.
Mr. Bissell was not sanguine,
but he was thinking.
One day, walking down
Broadway, be halted to rest
in the shade of an awning
before a drug store. In the
window he saw on a bottle
a curious label. "Ki~r' s Petroleum, or Rock
Oil," it read. "Celebrated for its wonderful
curative powers. A Natural Remedy ; Produced
from a well in Allegheny Co., Pa.,
four hundred feet below the earth's surface,"
etc. On the label was the picture of an
artesian well. It was from this well that Mr.
Kier got his "Natural Remedy." Hundreds
of men had seen the label before, but this
was the first to look at it with a " seeing
eye." As quickly as the bottle of rock oil in
the Dartmouth laboratory had awakened
in Mr. Bissell's mind the determination to
find out the real value of the strange substance,
the label gave him the solution of the
problem of getting oil in quantities-it was
to bore down into the earth where it was
stored, and pump it up.

Drake Strikes Oil

The company accepted the idea, and in
the spring of 1858 sent a small stockholder,
E. L. Drake, to sink an artesian well for
oil. Drake had had no experience to fit him
for his task. A man forty years of age, he
had spent his life as a clerk, an express agent,
and a railway conductor. His only qualifications
were a dash of pioneer blood and a great
persistency in undertakings which interested
him. The spot to which he was sent was Titusville,
a lumberman's hamlet on Oil Creek,
seventeen miles from where that stream joins
the Allegheny River. Its chief connection
with the outside world
was by stage to Erie,
forty miles away. ThiR
remoteness from civilization,
Drake's own
ignorance of artesian
wells, and the general
skepticism of the
community concerning
the enterprise, caused
great difficulty and long
delays. It was months before
Drake succeeded in
getting together the
tools, engine, and rigging
necessary to bore his well,
and before he could get
a driller who knew how
to manipulate them wint
er had come, and he had
to suspend operations.
People called him crazy
for sticking to the enterprise,
but it had no effect
on him. As soon a." spring
opened he borrowed a
horse and wagon and
drove a hundred miles to
find a driller. He brought
back a man, and after a
few more months of experiments
and accidents
the drill was started. On
August 29th, Titusville
was electrified by the
news that Drake's Folly,
as many of the onlookers
had come to consider it,
had justified itself. The well was full of oil.
The next day a pump was started, and
twenty-five barrels of oil were gathered.
There was no doubt of the meaning of the
Drake well in the minds of the people of the
vicinity. They had long ago accepted all Professor
Silliman had said of the possibilities of
petroleum, and now that they knew how it
could be obtained in quantity, the whole countryside
rushed out to obtain leases.

On every rocky farm, in every poor settlement
of the region, was some man whose ear
was attuned to _Fortune's call, and who had
the daring and the energy to risk everything
he possessed in an oil lease. It was well that
he acted at once; for, as the news of the discovery
of oil reached the open, the farms and
towns of Ohio, New York, and Pennsylvania
poured out a stream of ambitious and vigorous
youths, eager to seize what might be there
for them, while from the East came men with
money and business ex-
' perience, who formed
great stock companies,
took up lands in parcels
of thousands of acres, and
put down wells along
every rocky run and
creek, as well as over the
steep hills. In answer to
their drill, oil poured
forth in floods. In many
places pumping was out
of the question ; the wells
flowed : 2,000, 3,000,
4,000 barrels a day ; such
quantities of it that at
the close of 1861, oil
which in Janu ary of
1860 was twenty dollars a
barrel had fallen to ten
cents.

Here was the oil and in
unheard-of quantities, and
with it came all the swarm
of problems which a
discovery brings. The
methods Drake had used
were crude and must be
improved. The processes
of r efining were those of
the laboratory and must
be developed. Communication
with the outside
world must be secured.
Markets must be built up;
indeed, a whole new commercial
machine had to be
created to meet the discovery.
These problems were not realized
before the region teemed with men to
wrestle with them- men "alive to the instant
need of t hings." They had to begin
with so simple and elementary a matter as
devising something to hold the oil. There
were not barrels enough to be
bought in America, although turpentine
barrels, molasses barrels,
whisky barrels-every sort of barrel
and cask- were added to new ones
made especially for oil. Reservoirs
excavated in the earth and faced
with logs and cement, and box-like
structures of planks or logs were
tried at first but were not satisfactory.
Ayoung Iowa school teacher
and farmer, visiting at his home
in Erie County, went to the region.
Immediately he saw his chance. It
was to invent a receptacle which
would hold oil in quantities. Certain
large producers listened to his
scheme and furnished money to
make a trial tank. It was a success,
and before many months the school
teacher was buying thousands of
feet of lumber, employing scores of
men, and working them and himself
day and night. For nearly ten
years he built these wooden tanks.
Then seeing that iron tankshuge
receptacles holding thousands
of barrels where his held hundreds
- were bound to supersede him, he
turned, with the ready adaptability
which characterized the men of
the region, to producing oil for
others to tank.

A Problem in Transportation

After the storing problem came that
of transportation. There was one
waterway leading out- Oil Creek,
as it had been called for more than a
hundred years,-an uncertain stream
running the length of the narrow
valley in which the oil was found
and uniting with the Allegheny
River, at what is now known as Oil
City. From this junction it was 132
miles to Pittsburg and a railroad.
Besides this waterway were rough country
roads leading to the railroads; at Union
City, Corry, Erie, and Meadville. There was
but one way to get the oil to the bank of Oil
Creek or to the railroads, and that was by putting
it in barrels and hauling it. Teamsters
equipped for this service seemed to fall from
the sky. The farms for a hundred miles around
gave up their boys and· horses and wagons
to supply the need. It paid. There were times
when three and even four dollars a barrel
were paid for hauling five or ten miles.

It was not too much for the work. The best
roads over which they traveled were narrow,
rough, unmade highways, mere openings to the
outer world, while the roads to the wells they
had to break themselves, across fields and
throughfo rests. These roadsweremadealmost
impassable by the great number of heavily
freighted wagons traveling over them. From
the big wells a constant procession of teams
ran, and it was no uncommon thing for a visitor
to the Oil Regions to meet oil caravans of
a hundred or more wagons. Often these caravans were held up for hours by a dangerous
mud hole into which a wheel had sunk or a
horse fallen. If there was a possible way to
be made around the obstruction it was taken,
even if it led through a farmer's field. Indeed,
a sort of guerilla warfare went on constantly
between the farmers and the teamsters. Of ten
the roads became impassable, so that new ones
had to be broken, and not even a shot-gun
could keep the driver from going where the
passage was least difficult. The teamster, in
fact, earned a weapon which fewfarmers were
brave enough to face- his terrible "blacksnake,'"
as his long, heavy black whip was
called. The man who had once felt thecruel
lash of a black-snake around his legs did not
often oppose the owner.

With the wages paid him the teamster could
easily become a kind of plutocrat. One early
producer tells of having a teamster in his
employ who for nine weeks drew only enough
of his earnings to feed himself and horses. He
slept in his wagon and tethered the team. At
the end of the time be
"thought he'd go
home for a clean
shirt" and asked for a
settlement. It was
found that he had
$1,900 to his credit.
The story is a fair
illustration both of the
habits and the earnings
of the Oil Creek
teamsters. Indispensable
to the business,
they became the tyrants
of the regionworking
and brawling
as suited them, a
class not unlike the
flat-boatmen who once
gave color to life on
the Mississippi, or the
cowboys who make
the plains picturesque
to-day. Bad as their
reputation was, many
a man found in their
ranks the start which
led later to wealth and
influence in the oil business.

In the problem of transportation the most important element after the team was Oil Creek and the flat-boat. A more uncertain
stream never ran in a bed. In the summer
it was low, in the winter frozen ; now it
was gorged with ice, now running mad over the
flats. The best service was gotten out of it in
time of low water through artificial freshets.
Mill dams, controlled by private parties, were
frequent along the creek and its tributaries.
By arrangement these dams were cut on a
certain day or days of the week-usually Friday,
and on the flood or freshet the flat-boats
loaded with barrels of oil were floated down
stream. The freshet was always exciting and
perilous, and frequently disastrous. From the
points where they were tied up, the boatmen
watched the coming flood and cut themselves
loose the moment after its head had passed
them. As one fleet after another swung into
the roaring flood the danger of collision and
jams increased. Rare indeed was the freshet
which did not leave a few wrecks somewhere
along the creek, of ten scores, piled high
on the bank--a hopeless jam of broken
boats and barrels, the whole soaked in petro
leum and reeking with gas. If the boats rode
safely through to the Allegheny River, there
was little further danger.

The Allegheny River traffic grew to great
proportions- fully 1,000 boats and some
thirty steamers were in the fleet, and at least
4,000 men. This traffic was developed by men
who saw here their opportunity of fortune, as others had
seen it in drilling
and teaming. The
foremost of these
men was an Ohio
River captain, driven
northward by the
war, one J. J. Vandergrift.
Captain
Vandergrift had run
the full gamut of
river experiences
from cabin-boy to
owner and commander
of his own
steamers. The war
stopped his Mississippi
River trade.
Fitting up one of his
steamers as a gunboat,
he turned it
over to Commodore
Foote and looked for
a new stream to navigate.
From the Oil
Region at that moment
the loudest cry
was for barrels. He
towed 4,000 empty
casks up the river,
saw at once the need
of some kind of bulk
transportation,
took his hint from a
bulk-boat which an
ingenious experimenter
was trying,
ordered a dozen of
them built, towed his
fleet to the creek,
bought oil to fill
them, and then returned to Pittsburg to sell his cargo. On one
trip alone he made $70,000.

But the railroad soon pressed the river
hard. At the time of the discovery of oil,
three trunk lines-the Pennsylvania, the Lake
Shore and Michigan Southern (connecting
with the Central), and the Atlantic and Great
Wes tern (connecting with the Erie)- were
within teaming distance of the region. The
points at which the Pennsylvania road was
reached were Erie, forty-four miles from Titusville,
Union City, twenty-two miles, and Corry,
twenty-six miles. The Lake Shore was reached
at Erie. The Atlantic and Great Western was
reached at Meadville, Union City, and Corry,
and the distances were twenty-eight, twentytwo,
and twenty-six miles, respectively.
Erie was the favorite point at first, as the
roads in that direction
were the best.
The amount of
freight the railroads
carried the first year
of the business was
enormous. It was said
that in January,
1861, the Pennsylvania
had earned
enough in this one
year carrying oil and
machinery to pay six
per cent. on the entire
cost of the construction
of theroad.
Of course, connecting
lines were built
as rapidly as men
could work. By the
beginning of 1863
the Oil Creek Road,
as it was called, had
reached Titusville
from Corry; this
gave an eastern connection
by both the
Pennsylvania and the
Erie, but as the Erie
was constructing a
branch from Meadville
to Franklin, the
Oil Creek road became
the feeder of
the Pennsylvania
principally. Both of
these roads were
completed to Oil City
by 1865.

The railroads built,
the vexatious, time-taking, and costly problem
of getting the oil from the well to the
shipping point, still remained. The teamster
was still the tyrant of the business. His day
was almost over. He was to fall before
the pipe-line. The feasibility of carrying
oil in pipes was discussed almost from the
beginning of the oil business, and early in
1862 a company was organized for the pur-
pose. Various experiments were made, both
gravity and pumps being trusted for propelling
the oil, but there was always something
wrong; the pipes leaked or burst, the
pumps were too weak. The idea had been almost
abandoned when the man for the need
appear!'ld, Samuel Van Syck el. He came to the
creek in 1864 with some money, hoping to
make more. He struck oil several miles from
a shipping point and saw his profits eaten up
by teamsters. Their tyranny aroused his ire
and his wits, andhedetermined to build a pipeline
from his wells to the railroad. He was
greeted with jeers, but he went doggedly
ahead, laid his pipes, put up his pumps, and
turned in his oil. From the start the line was
a success, doing the work of 300 teams working
ten hours a day. On the day that the Van
Syckel pipe line began to run oil a revolution
began in the husiness. After the Drake well it
is the most important event in the history of
t he Oil Regions.
The teamsters saw its meaning first and
turned out in fury, dragging the pipe, which
was for the most part buried, to the surface,
and cutting it so that the oil would be lost.
It was only by stationing an armPd guard
that they were held in check. A second lint' of

importance suffered even more than that of
Van Syckel. The teamsters did more than cut
the pipe; they burned the tanks in which oil
was stored, laid in wait for employees, threatened
with destruction the wells which furnished
the oil, and so generally terrorized the
country that the governor of the State was
called upon in April, 1866, to protect the
property and men of the lines. The day of
the teamster was over, and the more philosophical
of them accepted the situation;
scoresdisappearedfrom the region, and scores
more took to drilling. They died hard, and the
cutting and plugging of pipe-lines was for
years a pastime of the remnant of their race.

Making and Marketing a New Product

If the uses to which oil might be put and the
methods for manufacturing it had not been
well understood when the Drake well was
struck, there would have been no such imperious
demand as came for the immediate opening
of new territory and developing methods of
handling and carrying it on a large scale.
But men knew already what the oil was good
for and, in a crude way, how to distill it. The
process of distillation also was free to all.

The essential apparatus was very simple-a
cast-iron still, usually surrounded by brick-
a copper worm, and two tin or zinc-
lined tanks. The still was filled with crude oil,
which was subjected to a heat high enough to
vaporize it. The vapor passed through a cast-
iron goose-neck fitted to the top of the still
into the copper worm, which was immersed in
water. Here the vapor was condensed and
passed into the zinc-lined tank. This product,
called a distillate, was treated with chemicals,
washed with water, and run off into the
tin-lined tank, where it was allowed to settle.
Anybody who could get the apparatus could
"make oil," and many men did it- badly, of
course, to begin with, and with an alarming
proportion of waste and explosions and fires,
but with experience they learned, and some
of the great refineries of the country grew
out of these rude beginnings.

Luckily, not all the men who undertook the
manufacturing of petroleum in these first
days were inexperienced. The chemisU! to
whom areduechiefty the processesnowusedAtwood,
Gessner, and Merrill- had for years
been busy making oils from. coal. They knew
something of petroleum, and when it came in
quantities began at once to adapt their procwork,
esses to it. Merrill at the time was connected
with Sarr.uel Downer, of Boston, in manufacwhich
turing oil from Trinidad pitch and from a
coal bought in Newfoundland. The year oil
was discovered Mr. Downer distilled 7,500
tons of this coal, clearing on it at least $100,-
000. As soon as petroleum appeared he and
Mr. Merrill saw that here was a product
which was bound to displace their coal, and
with courage and promptness they prepared
to adapt their works. In order to be near the
supply they came to Corry, twenty-six miles
from the Drake well, and in 1862 put up a
refinerywhich cost $250,000. Here were refined
thousandsof barrels of oil, most of which
was sent to New York for export. To the Boston
works the firm sent crude, which was manufactured
for home trade and for shipping to
California and Australia. The processes used
in the Downer works at this early day were in
all essentials the same as are used to-day.

As men and means were found to put down
wells, to devise and build tanks and boats and
pipes and railroads for handling the oil, to
adapt and improve processes for manufacturing,
so men were found from the beginning
of the oil business to tackle every problem
raised. They came in shoals, young, vigorous,
resourceful, indifferent to difficulties, greedy
for a chance, and with each year they forced
more light and wealth from the new product.
By the opening of 1872, they had produced
nearly 40,000,000 barrels of oil, and had
raised their product to the fourth place among
the exports of the l:nited States, over 152,-
000,000 gallons going abroad in 1871, a
percentage comparing well with what goes
to-day.* As for the market, they had developed
it until it included almost every country
of the earth-China, the East and West Indies,
South America, and Africa. Over forty
different European ports received oil. In 1871
nearly a million gallons were sent to Syria,
about a half million to Egypt, about as much
to the British West Indies, and a quarter of
a million to the Dutch East Indies.

The oil field had been extended from the
Valley of Oil Creek and its tributaries, down
the Allegheny River for nearly fifty miles, and
probably covered 2,000 square miles. The
early theory that oil followed the streams
had been exploded, and wells were now drilled
on the hills. It was known, too, that if oil was
not found in the first sand struck in the drilling,
it might be found in a second or third
sand, and even a fourth or fifth. The Drake
well had struck oil at 69! feet, but wells were
now drilled as deep as 1,600 feet. The extension
of the field, the discovery that oil was under
the hills as well as under streams, and to be
found in various sands, had cost enormously.
Ithad been done by "wildcatting," as putting
down experimental wells was called, by following
superstitions in locating wells, such
as the witch-hazel stick, or the spiritualistic
medium, quite as much as by studying the position
of wells in existence and calculating
how oil belts probably ran. As the cost of a
well was from $3,000 to $8,500,t according
to its location, and as 4,37 4 of the 5,560 wells
drilled in the first ten xears of the business
(1859 to 1869) were 'dry-holes,'' or were
abandoned as unprofitable, something of the
daring it took to operate on such small means
as most producers did in the beginning, is evident.
But they loved the game, and every man
of them would stake his last dollar on the
chance of striking oil.

With the extension of the field rapid strides
had been made in tools, in rigs-in all of
the various essentials of drilling a well. They
had learned to use torpedoes to open up hard
rocks, naphtha to cut theparaffinewhichcoated
the sand and stopped the flow of oil, seed bags
to hold back the inrush of a stream of water.
They lost their tools less of ten, and knew better
how to fish ft>r them when they did. In
short, they had learned how to put down and
care for oil wells.

Equal advances had been made in other
departments. Fewer cars were loaded with
barrels; tank cars for carrying in bulk had
been invented. The wooden tank had been
replaced by the iron tank holding twenty or
thirty thousand barrels. The pipe-lines had
begun to go directly to the wells instead of
pumping from a general receiving station, or
"dump," as it was called, thus saving the
tedious and expensive operation of hauling.
From beginning to end the business had been
developed, systematized, simplified. There
is no part of this rapid development more important
than the commercial machine they
had devised by 1872 for marketing oil. A man
with a thousand-barrel well on his hands in
1862 was in a plight. He must sell his oil at
once for lack of storage room or let it run on
the ground ; and there was no exchange, no
market, no telegraph, not even a post-office
within his reach where he could arrange a
sale. He had to depend on buyers who came
to him. These buyers were the agents of the
refineries in different cities, or of the exporters
ofcrude in New York. Theywentfrom well
to well on horseback, if the roads were not too
bad, on foot if they were, and at each place
made a special bargain varying with the
quantity bought and the difficulty in getting
it away; for the buyer was the transporter,
and, asa rule, furnished the barrels or boats in
which he carried off his oil. It was not long
before the speculative character of the oil
trade, due to the great fluctuations in quantity,
added a crowd of brokers to the regular
buyers who tramped up and down the creek.
When the railroads came in, the trains became
the headquarters for both buyers and sellers.
This was the more easily managed, as the trains
on the creek stopped at almost every oil farm.
These trainB became, in fact, a sort of traveling
oil exchange, and on them a large percentage
of all the bargaining of the business
was done.

The brokers and buyers first organized and
established headquarters in Oil City in 1869,
but there was an oil exchange in New York
City a.<1 early as 1866. Titusville did not have
an exchange until 1871. By this time the pipe
lines had begun to issue cer tificates for the
oil they received, and the trading was done to
a degree in these. The method was simple, and
much more convenient than the old one. The
producer ran bis oil into a pipe-line, and for it
received a certificate showing that the line
held so much to his credit ; this cer tificate
was transferred when the sale was made, and
presented when the oil was wanted. It was a
device of Charles P. Hatch, the man who, as
early as 1869, had evolved the pipe-line
methods of doing business practically as they
stand to-day.

One achievement of which the oil men were
particularly proud was the increase in the refining
capacity of the region. At the start the
difficulty of getting the apparatus for a refinery
to the creek had been so enormous that
the bulk of the crude had been driven to the
nearest manufacturing cities-Erie, Pittsburg,
Cleveland. Much had gone to the seaboard,
too, and Boston, New York, Philadelphia,
and Baltimore were all doing considerable
refining. There was always a strong feeling in
the Oil Regions that the refining should be done
at home. Before the railroads came the most
heroic efforts were made again and again to
get in the necessary machinery. Brought from
Pittsburg by water, as a rule, the apparatus
had to be hauled from Oil City, where it had
been dumped on the muddy bank of the riverthere
were no wharfs- over the indescribable
roads to the site chosen. It took weeks-months
sometimes- to get in the apparatus.
The chemicals used in the making of the oil,
the barrels in which to store it, all had to be
brought from outside. The wonder is that
under these conditions anybody tried to refine
on the creek. But refineries persisted in coming,
and after the railroads came, multiplied ;
by 1872 the capacity had grown to nearly
10,000 barrels, and there were no more complete
or profitable plants in existence than
two or three of those on the creek. The exultation
was great, and the press and people
boasted that the day would soon come
when theywould refine for the world. There
in their own narrow valleys should be made
everything which petroleum would yield.
Cleveland, Pittsburg, the seaboard, must
give up refining. The business belonged to
the Oil Region, and the oil men meant to take
it.

The Troubles of a New Industry

The odds against the oil men in developing
the business had not been merely physical
ones. There had been more than the wilderness
to conquer, more than the possibilities of
a new product to learn. Over all the early
years of their struggle and hardship hovered
the dark cloud of the Civil War. They were
so cut off from men that they did not hear of
the fall of Sumter until four days after it happened,
and the news for the time blotted out
interest even in flowing wells. Twice at least,
when Lee invaded Pennsylvania, the whole
business came to a standstill, men abandoning
the drill, the.pump, therefinery, to make ready
to repel the invader. They were taxed for the
war-the taxes rising as high as $10 per
barrel in 1865, $1 on crude, and twenty
cents a gallon on refined (the oil barrel is
usually estimated at forty-two gallons).
They gave up their quota of men again and
again at the call for recruits, and when the
end came and a million men were cast on the
country, this little corner of Pennsylvania absorbed
a larger portion of men probably than
any other spot in the United States. The soldier
was given the first chance everywhere
at work: he was welcomed into oil companies,
stock being given him for the value of bis
war record. There were lieutenants and captains
and majors- even generals- scattered
all over the field, and the field felt itself honored,
and bragged, as it did of all things, of
the number of privates and officers who immediately
on disbandment had turned to it
for employment.

It was not only the Civil War from which the
Oil Regions had suffered ; in 1870 the Franco-
Prussian War broke the foreign market to
pieces and caused great loss to the whole industry.
And there bad been other troubles.
From the first oil men bad to contend with wild
fluctuations in the price of oil. It had begun
in 1859 at $20 a barrel, and in 1861 it had
averaged fifty-two cents. Two years later, in
1863, it averaged $8.15, and in 1867 but
$2.40. In all these first twelve years nothing
like a steady price could be depended on,
for just as the supply seemed to have approached
a fixed amount a "wildcat" well
would come in and "knock the bottom out of
the market." Such fluctuations were the natural
element of the speculator, and he came
early, buying in quantities and holding in storage
tanks for higher prices. If enough oil was
held or if the production fell off, up went the
price, only to be knocked down by the throwing
of great quantities of stocks on the market.
To develop a business in face of such
fluctuations and speculation in the raw product
took not only courage- it took a dash
of the gambler.

Speculation in oil stock companies was another
great evil. It reached its height in 1864
and 1865- the "flush times" of the business.
Stocks in companies whose holdings were
hardly worth the stamps on the certificates
were sold all over the land. In March, 1865,
the aggregate capital of t he oil companies
whose charters were on file in Albany, New
York, was $350,000,000, and in Philadelphia
alone in 1864 and 1865 1,000 oil companies,
mostly bogus, are said to have been formed.
These swindles were dignified by the names of
officers of distinction in the United States
Army, for the war was coming to an end and
the name of a general was the most popular
and persuasive argument in the country. Of
course, there came a collapse. The "oil bubble"
burst in 1866, and it was nothing but the
irrepressible energy of the region which kept
the business going in the panic which fol-
lowed. Then there was the disturbing effect
of foreign competition. What would become
of the business if oil was found in quantities
in other countries? A decided depression of
the market occurred in 1866, when the Government
sent out reports of developments
of foreign oil fields. If there was oil in
.Japan, China, Burmah, Persia. Russia, Bavaria,
in the quantities thA Government r eports
said, why t here was trouble in store for Pennsylvania,
the oil men argued, and for a day
the market fell- it was only for a day. Men
forgot easily in the Oil Regions in the '60's.

An evil in their business which they were
only beginning to grasp fully in 1871 was the
unholy system of freight discriminaLion~
which the railroads were practising. Three
trunk lines competed for the business by 1872
- the Pennsylvania, the Erie, and t he Central.
(The latter road reached the Oil Regions by a
branch from Ashtabula on the Lake Shore
and Michigan Southern division to Oil City;
this branch was completed in 1868.) The
Pennsylvania claimed the oil traffi~ as a natural
right, for the Oil Regions were in Pennsylvania,
and did not Tom Scott own that
State? The Erie road for about five years
bad been in the hands of those splendid pirates,
Jay Gould and" Jim" Fisk. Naturally,
they took all they ceuld get of the oil traffic,
and took it by freebooting methods. "Corners"
and "rings" were their favorite devices
of securing trade, and more than once their
aid had carried through daring and unscrupulous
speculations in oil. The Central in this
period was waging its famous desperate war
on the Erie, Commodore Vanderbilt having
marked that highway for his own along with
moat other things in New York State. All
three of the roads began, about 1868, to use
secret rebates on the published freight rates
in' oil as a means of securing traffic. This unlawful
practice had gone on until, in 1871,
any big producer, refiner, or buyer could bully
a freight agent into a special rate. Those" on
the inside "- thosewho had "pulls "-also secured
speciaI,r3tes. Th~result was that the
open rate was enforced only on the innocent
and the weak.
Serious as all these problems were, there
was no discouragement or shrinking from
them. The oil men had rid themselves of
bunco men and burst the " oil bubbles."
They had harnessed the brokers in exchanges
and made strict rules to govern
them. They had learned not to fear the foreigners
and to take with equal sang froid
the " dry-hole " which made them poor, or
tl1e " gusher" which made them rich.
For every evil they had a remedy. They were
not afraid even of the railroads, and loudly
declared that if the discriminations were
not stopped they would build a railroad
of their own. Indeed. the evils in the oil business
in 1871, far from being a discouragement,
rather added to. the interest. They
had never known anything but strugglewith
conquest-and twelve years of it was
far from cooling their ardor for a fair fight.

The Conquests of a Decade

More had been done in the Oil Regions in the
first dozen years than develop a new industry.
From the first there had gone with the oil
men's ambition to make oil to light the whole
earth a desire to bring civilization to the
wilderness from which they were drawing
wealth, to create an orderly society from the
mass of humanity which poured pell-mell into
the region. A hatred of indecency first drew
together the better element of each of the
rough communities which sprang up. Whisky-
sellers and women flocked to the region
at the breaking out of the excitement. Their
first shelters were shanties built on flat-boats,
which were towed from place to place. They
came to Rouseville- a collection of pine
shanties and oil derricks, built on a muddy
flat-as forlorn and disreputable a town in
appearance as the earth ever saw. They tied
up for trade, and the next morning woke up
from their brawl to find themselves twenty
miles away, floating down the Allegheny
River. Jtouseville meant to be decent. She
ha.d cut them loose, and by such summary
vigilance she kept herself decent. Other
towns adopted the same policy. By common
consent vice was corralled almost entirely in
one town. Here a whole street was given
up to dance-houses and saloons, and those
who must have a " spree " were expected to
go to Petroleum Center to take it.

Decency and schools! Vice cut adrift, they
looked for a school teacher. Children were
sadly out of place, but there they were, and
these men, fighting for a chance, saw to it
that a shanty, with a school teacher in it, was
in every settlement. It was not long before
there was a church- a union church. To worship
God was their primal instinct; to defend
a creed a later development. In the beginning
every social contrivance was wanting.
There were no policemen, and each individual
looked after evil-doers. There were no
firemen, and every man turned out with a
bucket at a fire. There were no bankers, and
each man had to put his wealth away as best
he could until a peripetic banker from Pittsburg
relieved him. At one time Dr. Egbert,
a rich operator, is said to have had $1,800,-
000 in currency in his house. There were no
hospitals, and in 1861, when the horrible
possibilities of the oil fire were first demonstrated
by the burning of the Rouse well- a
fire at which nineteen persons lost their lives
- the many injured found welcome and care
for long weeks in the little shanties of women
already over-burdened by the difficulties of
caring for families in the rough community.

Out of this poverty and disorder they had
developed in t en years a social organization
as good as their commercial. Titusville, the
hamlet on whose outskirts Drake had drilled
his well, was now a city of 10,000 inhabitants.
It had an opera house, where in 1871
Clara Louise Kellogg and Christine Nilsson
sang, Joe Jefferson and Janauschek played,
Wendell Phillips and Bishop Simpson spoke.
It had two prosperous and fearless newspapers.
Its schools prepared for college.
Oil City was not behind, and between them
was a string of lively towns. Many of the
oil farms had a decent community life. The
Columbia Farm kept up a library and reading-
room for its employees ; there was a good
school-house, used on Sunday for servi ces, and
there was a Columbia Farm Band, of no mean
reputation.

Indeed, by the opening of 1872, life in the
Oil Regions had ceased to be a mere makeshift.
Comfort and orderliness, even opportunities
for education and for social life, were
within r each. It was a conquest to be pt"oud
of, quite as proud of as they were of the fact
that their business had been developed until
it had never been, on the whole, in so satisfactory
a condition.

Nobody realized more fully what had been
accomplished in the Oil Regions than the oil
men themselves. Nobody rehearsed their
achievements so loudly. '' Jn ten years,'' they
were fond of saying, " we have built this
business up from nothing to a net product of
six millions of barrels per annum. We have
invented and devised all the apparatus, the
appliances, the forms needed for a new industry.
We use a capital of $200,000,000,
and support a population of 60,000 people.
To keep up our supply we drill 100 new wells
per month, at an average cost of $6,000
each. We are fourth in the exports of the
United States. We have developed a foreign
market, including every civilized country on
the globe."

But what had been done was, in their judgment,
only a beginning. Life ran swift and
ruddy and joyous in these men. They were
still young, most of them under forty, and
they looked forward with all the eagerness
pf the young who have just learned their
powers, to years of struggle and development.
They would solve all these perplexing
prohlems of over-production, of milroad
discrimination, of speculation. They would
meet their own needs. They would bring the
oil refining to the region where it belonged.
They would make their towns the most beautiful
in the world. There was nothing too gcod
for them, nothing they did not hope and
dare.

Suddenly, at the very heyday of this confidence,
a big hand reached out from nobody
knew where, to steal their conquest and
throttle their future. The suddenness and the
blackness of the assault on their business
stirred to the bottom their manhood and their
sense of fair play, and the whole region arose
in a revolt which is scarcely paralleled in the
commercial history of the United States.














Jn 1R71 the petroleum export11 were 152.11!5.617 gnllone.
The production was 5.7'95,000 h:irrcl11, nr 24~.3\10,000 }.!"11llons.
t Estimate of ,J. T. Henry In hi" "History of l'etrolt•nm ,"
1873. The "Petroleum Monthly" of 1873 l'8ti111111l's co•t to
lie from s2. 725 to !4,418.
